Welcome!
In this lecture, Methods and User Input, we are going to be learning
to teach ourselves, by using the Unity documentation, and
how to get input from the user. In order to do this, we're going to need to know
about a little thing called methods or also known as
functions, but we're going to be using the term methods, and we're going to be
learning about what this Update () method is all about. So let's dive right in!
So this is where we left off with our code, and I want to show you
where we are in the pseudocode. So we've done a little bit of
update location from home. We haven't actually updated the location, because
we haven't got the input yet. So we're going to be looking at how
to get the input, in this lecture. Now, I want to teach
you guys to teach yourselves, essentially, because programming is so expansive that you
could never know it all. You simply have to know how to get
to the answer, and you know, things like Stack Overflow are great tools and
well Google is going to be your biggest friend, so let's start right there! We want to
know how to get input in Unity. And
more specifically, what do we want to do? Well we want to know whether the user
has pressed down a key in order to update
our location, based on what they've pressed. So we're going to
say, how do we get a key down in
Unity?
Now this is a little bit cheating, because I
know that the method is called GetKeyDown in Unity, and that's
the terminology that's used. But, similarly, if you just look for "Unity
input" you would get there, eventually. So you'd get to this page,
on Unity Input, and it would describe the various methods there.
And you might go ooh OK, so what do we have? We've got GetKeyDown, Get blah blah
blah. So we've got GetButtonDown, GetKeyDown, and so on. I'll tell
you that GetKeyDown is the one we're going to be using most frequently.
So that is the main important thing, but
first off, we need to understand what on Earth this is actually talking about! What
is this syntax, with the GetKeyDown? If you look at the example, it's got
an if statement, I get that, but you know, we've got
this stuff going on. What is this? It's similar to print, we understand that, but
it looks a bit different, it's got this dot syntax as well. So
that's all a bit confusing, so let's have a look at it! This is what's known
as a method. Print is also known as a method, but basically, a
method is very much like a factory, it does some work. You don't need
to know about the internal workings of the factory, all you need to know is
what it produces and what you have to give it. So the
input to this factory is the inputs here inside
the brackets, similarly to print. In print
we gave it text, we only gave it one input, and
then it does some operation, it does some working inside the factory with those
inputs, and it produces, sometimes, some output. In the case of print, there's no
output other than to the console, but there's nothing that
this expression evaluates to. However, with
GetKeyDown, we actually get a boolean coming out the other side,
and that boolean is going to be important, because it tells us whether the
key has been pressed in this frame.
So obviously in games you're familiar with the concept of a
frame rate, and that basically means how many times a second is it
running the code. So we can say, in this particular
frame in this time slot, has the user
pressed the key down, and if so, we'll do some action. So
we know what methods are, and we can take a little bit more of
a deep dive on this GetKeyDown. So the dot operator, you don't have to
worry about too much, just treat it as if it's part of the
full name, for now, and we will get into more detail as to what dots
actually mean later on. But for now, we have
this Input.GetKeyDown, and then we pass it
some sort of argument here. Argument is another word for input,
so this is the argument that we're passing it.
And then, we can do something
with the result, which in this case because it's a boolean and it creates a boolean
value, we can use it in an if statement. OK, so let's try that
out ourselves! If we go and put
the if in the bottom here,
say if (Input.GetKeyDown()).
And then, what do we put in here? Well there are two options you can see
right here. We've got a KeyCode option and one which takes a string
name. Let's, for now, stick with the type that we know,
which is the string. And
what are the names that it can have? Well we've got space, so...
Well that's actually not very easy to find out,
what the other things are, but if you don't, go with the KeyCode example
down here. You see that's very straight forward, we just have a KeyCode dot
and the name. So let's try that one out, because VisualStudio might be able to help us
out here! So we want (KeyCode
dot... Hmm? OK. So let's say
the LeftArrow. Ah hah, there we go!
So VisualStudio has helped us out and given us the
(KeyCode.LeftArrow). Now, really what's happening here is that KeyCode
is a list, essentially, of different
integer values, and by using the dot
operator, we can get an element of that
list. And as you see, when I hover over it, it says that actually the value of that
is 276. We don't have to worry about it, but we could probably just have put
(276). But this is a nice representative name,
KeyCode.Left
Arrow), and that basically allows
VisualStudio to help us out. The same thing is going on with
Input here. Input is just a list of methods to
do with Input, and we can do a dot to Get the KeyDown.
OK, let's write the body of our statement here, and
I'll do it print("Left
key pressed."). I'll put a
semicolon on the end, and let's go ahead and play!
OK, so
now if I hit my Left Key... Hmm, nothing is
happening! Now, why is that? Well the hint is
with this Start (). So what we already said about
Start () is that, this code is executed at the start of
our game. Now, what we actually want to happen is this to happen
every single frame, so every single time slot. So we need to move
this into the Update, which handily enough has a comment saying "// Update
is called once per frame". So let's cut and paste this,
using my Mac keyboard shortcuts there. [Laughs]
That's not so great. OK, so I've copied and pasted it, and I just want
to draw your attention to something called indentation. You can see that
VisualStudio is doing a lot of the indentation for us, automatically,
but basically, we are, whenever we are
going between these braces here, the curly
braces, then we are adding a level of indentation. This just makes it
easier to read and so, between these update
braces we've got one more level of indentation, and then between these if statement
braces we also have a level of indentation. So let's save that,
go back into Unity, and hit play!
Now, you see when I hit the Left Key I get
that key pressed! So that is working! A method which we gave
an argument, remember argument is another word for input.
We gave the argument of the LeftArrow, it tells
us whether, in this frame, the key that we gave it is
down, and then, it tells us that as an output of a boolean.
So the return value, so output is another word
for, in our terminology we're going to call it a return value.
So we have been able to do that! It's time for you to have a
little challenge of handling the other keys. Well in this game we only have a
backwards and forwards, so far. So use the code you have written and
add a new case, a new if statement, for the Right Arrow. And which
KeyCode should you be using? Well you can use VisualStudio's hints
to get that out of it. So let's pause the video
and have a go! OK welcome back! Let's
try the other key, the Right Key. So I'm going to copy this over,
and using my Mac keyboard shortcuts again
and I'm going to go over and paste. My other computer
is a Mac, I should have that sticker on the back of my computer. And then,
RightArrow. Funnily enough, you could
have guessed it, but if you want to, you can do a dot and then Right.
There you go, you get things like RightApple, RightArrow, RightBracket, and so on, all the
types of key names that you might want. And let's just change the text
to say something appropriate like ("Right key pressed."),
and go into Unity and hit play.
So now, I can hit different keys, and that is
what I'm going to get as output, these different log messages.
Success! So we have successfully got input, We have learned
what methods are. Like this, we've seen that
print () is an example of a method, GetKeyDown () is an example of a method, and I actually
want to draw your attention to something a little bit sneaky, but this Start () and Update ()
are also examples of methods. In this case, we aren't calling
them but we are defining them. So we're saying that we have created
this Update () method, and then, this Update () method gets called from somewhere else, it gets called
from Unity, on every frame. So that's just a little bonus piece of information
about methods. OK, so we are good
with getting input! The only problem now is, if
we want to update our location. Our location is
currently not available to us in this method. I can try that out, I can
say location, and you can see it's
not even completing, location, it's still completing into a completely different thing.
That's because it's not in scope, and we're going to talk a bit about scope
in the next lecture! See you there!